Iram of the pillars,
the like of which was never created in the land,
and Thamood, who hollowed the rocks in the valley,
and Pharaoh, he of the tent-pegs,
who all were insolent in the land
and worked much corruption therein?
Thy Lord unloosed on them a scourge of chastisement;
surely thy Lord is ever on the watch.
As for man, whenever his Lord tries him, and honours him, and blesses him, then he says, 'My Lord has honoured me.'
But when he tries him and stints for him his provision, then he says, 'My Lord has despised me.'
No indeed; but you honour not the orphan,
and you urge not the feeding of the needy,
and you devour the inheritance greedily,
and you love wealth with an ardent love
No indeed! When the earth is ground to powder,
and thy Lord comes, and the angels rank on rank,
and Gehenna is brought out, upon that day man will remember; and how shall the Reminder be for him?
He shall say, 'O would that I had forwarded for my life!'
Upon that day none shall chastise as He chastises,
none shall bind as He binds.
'O soul at peace,
return unto thy Lord, well-pleased, well-pleasing!
Enter thou among My servants!
Enter thou My Paradise!'
No! I swear by this land,
and thou art a lodger in this land;
by the begetter, and that he begot,
indeed, We created man in trouble.
What, does he think none has power over him,
saying, 'I have consumed wealth abundant'?
What, does he think none has seen him?
Have We not appointed to him two eyes,
and a tongue, and two lips,
and guided him on the two highways?
Yet he has not assaulted the steep;
and what shall teach thee what is the steep?
The freeing of a slave,
or giving food upon a day of hunger
to an orphan near of kin
or a needy man in misery;
then that he become of those who believe and counsel each other to be steadfast, and counsel each other to be merciful.
Those are the Companions of the Right Hand.
And those who disbelieve in Our signs, they are the Companions of the Left Hand;
over them is a Fire covered down.
By the sun and his morning brightness
and by the moon when she follows him,
and by the day when it displays him
and by the night when it enshrouds him!
By the heaven and That which built it
and by the earth and That which extended it!
By the soul, and That which shaped it
and inspired it to lewdness and godfearing!
Prosperous is he who purifies it,
and failed has he who seduces it.
Thamood cried lies in their insolence
when the most wretched of them uprose,
then the Messenger of God said to them, 'The She-camel of God; let her drink!'
But they cried him lies, and hamstrung her, so their Lord crushed them for their sin, and leveled them:
and He fears not the issue thereof.
By the night enshrouding
and the day in splendour
and That which created the male and the female,
surely your striving is to diverse ends.
As for him who gives and is godfearing
and confirms the reward most fair,
We shall surely ease him to the Easing.
But as for him who is a miser, and self-sufficient,
and cries lies to the reward most fair,
We shall surely ease him to the Hardship;
his wealth shall not avail him when he perishes.
Surely upon Us rests the guidance,
and to Us belong the Last and the First.
Now I have warned you of a Fire that flames,
whereat none but the most wretched shall be roasted,
even he who cried lies, and turned away;
and from which the most godfearing shall be removed,
even he who gives his wealth. to purify himself
and confers no favour on any man for recompense,
only seeking the Face of his Lord the Most High;
and he shall surely be satisfied.
By the white forenoon
and the brooding night!
Thy Lord has neither forsaken thee nor hates thee
and the Last shall be better for thee than the First.
Thy Lord shall give thee, and thou shalt be satisfied.
Did He not find thee an orphan, and shelter thee?
Did He not find thee erring, and guide thee?
Did He not find thee needy, and suffice thee?
As for the orphan, do not oppress him,
and as for the beggar, scold him not;
and as for thy Lord's blessing, declare it.
Did We not expand thy breast for thee
and lift from thee thy burden,
the burden that weighed down thy back?
Did We not exalt thy fame?
So truly with hardship comes ease,
truly with hardship comes ease.'
So when thou art empty, labour,
and let thy Lord be thy Quest.
By the fig and the olive
and the Mount Sinai
and this land secure!
We indeed created Man in the fairest stature
then We restored him the lowest of the low --
save those who believe, and do righteous deeds; they shall have a wage unfailing.
What then shall cry thee lies as to the Doom?
Is not God the justest of judges?
Recite: In the Name of thy Lord who created,
created Man of a blood-clot.
Recite: And thy Lord is the Most Generous,
who taught by the Pen,
taught Man that he knew not.
No indeed; surely Man waxes insolent,
for he thinks himself self-sufficient.
Surely unto thy Lord is the Returning.
What thinkest thou? He who forbids
a servant when he prays --
What thinkest thou? If he were upon guidance
or bade to godfearing --
What thinkest thou? If he cries lies, and turns away -
Did he not know that God sees?
No indeed; surely, if he gives not over, We shall seize him by the forelock,
a lying, sinful forelock.
So let him call on his concourse!
We shall call on the guards of Hell.
No indeed; do thou not obey him, and bow thyself, and draw nigh.
Behold, We sent it down on the Night of Power;
And what shall teach thee what is the Night of Power?
The Night of Power is better than a thousand months;
in it the angels and the Spirit descend, by the leave of their Lord, upon every command.
Peace it is, till the rising of dawn.
The unbelievers of the People of the Book and the idolaters would never leave off; till the Clear Sign came to them,
a Messenger from God, reciting pages purified,
therein true Books.
And they scattered not, those that were given the Book, excepting after the Clear Sign came to them.
They were commanded only to serve God, making the religion His sincerely, men of pure faith, and to perform the prayer, and pay the alms -- that is the religion of the True.
The unbelievers of the People of the Book and the idolaters shall be in the Fire of Gehenna, therein dwelling forever; those are the worst of creatures.
But those who believe, and do righteous deeds, those are the best of creatures;
their recompense is with their Lord-Gardens of Eden, underneath which rivers flow, therein dwelling for ever and ever. God is well-pleased with them, and they are well-pleased with Him; that is for him who fears his Lord.
When earth is shaken with a mighty shaking
and earth brings forth her burdens,
and Man says., 'What ails her?'
upon that day she shall tell her tidings
for that her Lord has inspired her.
Upon that day men shall issue in scatterings to see their works,
and whoso has done an atom's weight of good shall see it,
and whoso has done an atom's weight of evil shall see it.
By the snorting chargers,
by the strikers of fire,
by the dawn-raiders
blazing a trail of dust,
cleaving there with a host!
Surely Man is ungrateful to his Lord,
and surely he is a witness against that!
Surely he is passionate in his love for good things.
Knows he not that when that which is in the tombs is over-thrown,
and that which is in the breasts is brought out --
surely on that day their Lord shall be aware of them!
The Clatterer!
What is the Clatterer?
And what shall teach thee what is the Clatterer?
The day that men shall be like scattered moths,
and the mountains shall be like plucked wool-tufts.
Then he whose deeds weigh heavy in the Balance
shall inherit a pleasing life,
but he whose deeds weigh light in the Balance
shall plunge in the womb of the Pit.
And what shall teach thee what is the Pit?
A blazing Fire!
Gross rivalry diverts you,
even till you visit the tombs.
No indeed; but soon you shall know.
Again, no indeed; but soon you shall know.
No indeed; did you know with the knowledge of certainty,
you shall surely see Hell;
Again, you shall surely see it with the eye of certainty
then you shall be questioned that day concerning true bliss.
By the afternoon!
Surely Man is in the way of loss,
save those who believe, and do righteous deeds, and counsel each other unto the truth, and counsel each other to be steadfast.
Woe unto every backbiter, slanderer,
who has gathered riches and counted them over
thinking his riches have made him immortal!
No indeed; he shall be thrust into the Crusher;
and what shall teach thee what is the Crusher;
The Fire of God kindled
roaring over the hearts
covered down upon them,
in columns outstretched.
Hast thou not seen how thy Lord did with the Men of the Elephant?
Did He not make their guile to go astray?
And He loosed upon them birds in flights,
hurling against them stones of baked clay
and He made them like green blades devoured.
For the composing of Koraish,
their composing for the winter and summer caravan!
So let them serve the Lord of this House
who has fed them against hunger and secured them from fear.
Hast thou seen him who cries lies to the Doom?
That is he who repulses the orphan
and urges not the feeding of the needy.
So woe to those that pray
and are heedless of their prayers,
to those who make display
and refuse charity.
Surely We have given thee abundance;
so pray unto thy Lord and sacrifice.
Surely he that hates thee, he is the one cut off.
Say: 'O unbelievers,
I serve not what you serve
and you are not serving what I serve,
nor am I serving what you have served,
neither are you serving what I serve
To you your religion, and to me my religion!'
When comes the help of God, and victory,
and thou seest men entering God's religion in throngs,
then proclaim the praise of thy Lord, and seek His forgiveness; for He turns again unto men.
Perish the hands of Abu Lahab, and perish he!
His wealth avails him not, neither what he has earned;
he shall roast at a flaming fire
and his wife, the carrier of the firewood,
upon her neck a rope of palm-fibre.
Say: 'He is God, One,
God, the Everlasting Refuge,
who has not begotten, and has not been begotten,
and equal to Him is not any one.'
Say: 'I take refuge with the Lord of the Daybreak
from the evil of what He has created,
from the evil of darkness when it gathers,
from the evil of the women who blow on knots,
from the evil of an envier when he envies.'
Say: 'I take refuge with the Lord of men,
the King of men,
the God of men,
from the evil of the slinking whisperer
who whispers in the breasts of men
of jinn and men.'